(upbeat music)
- Hi, everyone. Danny here
from freelancetowin.com.
And today I'm going to
be talking to you about
the elements of a winning
proposal in 2021 and beyond.
Now, this is a very exciting topic for me.
It's one of my favorite
things to talk about
because I believe that being
able to write great proposals
is absolutely key to
your success on Upwork.
Now, first and foremost,
let's briefly go over
what you're going to learn
in this presentation.
One, I'll show you how to stand out
and get clients to notice your proposal,
even if you're new to Upwork.
Two, you'll also learn how to show clients
you're a good fit for their project.
And again, that's even if you're
a beginner here on Upwork.
Three, how to position yourself
as an authority on the
type of work you're doing,
including those of you
who may not have a big portfolio just yet.
Four, I'll show you how to
expertly answer screening questions.
And if you're still new to Upwork
and you aren't quite sure what those are,
don't worry, I'll be explaining that too.
And finally, I'll even
show you some next steps
that will help you put
this knowledge into action.
All right, we're about to get into it,
but first real quick, for those
of you who may not know me,
here's a brief overview of my work.
I've personally earned
hundreds of thousands of
dollars here on Upwork,
including over $100,000 in just 12 months.
And I don't say that to brag,
but just to let you know that
I'm no stranger to this stuff.
My work has also been featured
by many major publications,
including Inc, Bloomberg and many others.
I also have a popular blog
called Freelance To Win
where I share Upwork related
strategies and tips with
hundreds of thousands
of freelancers each year
from all over the world and
from different backgrounds,
industries and experience levels.
So I really believe that these
strategies I'm gonna show you
will be widely applicable.
I'm a writer,
yet these strategies
properly applied and adopted
can be effective in any work category.
Okay, so given that this talk is about
how to write a winning
proposal in 2021 and beyond,
let's talk briefly about
what we can expect in 2021 and beyond.
Well, it's a safe bet to assume
that clients will be
busier than ever before.
We also know clients today
have unprecedented choices
when it comes to hiring freelancers.
There are more people freelancing
right now than ever before
and we can expect that
trend to continue as well.
And finally, when it comes
to hiring freelancers,
clients have higher expectations
than they did in the past.
How do we know that?
Because as people are given more choices,
they also begin to naturally expect
better results from those choices.
This is sometimes known
as the paradox of choice.
Now, and this is very important,
there's also a tremendous
upside to these trends
because there are also
more clients, more projects
and more excellent
opportunities than ever before,
including more opportunities for us
to stand out and impress clients.
And I believe the best way to do that
is with a powerful, succinct proposal.
One of the best things about
the approaches I'm going
to show you is that
they're fairly easy to learn and implement
as some approaches that used to work well
may not be as effective going forward,
again, given the unprecedented level
of busyness and expectations
clients now have.
Now, in the next slide,
we're going to get right into it
and I'll show you how I
actually write proposals.
But first, in order for
it to make the most sense,
I want to set some context for you.
So here you can see my
big picture game plan
because my proposal isn't just a proposal,
it's actually a part of
an overall process I have
for acquiring new clients here on Upwork.
Specifically, my
proposals are not designed
to be deal closers.
In other words, I'm
not trying to get hired
off my proposal alone.
Rather, my proposals are
designed to start a conversation
and then hopefully get a
response from the client.
And assuming all goes well,
I will then go into further
discussion with them
about the project.
I liked this approach
for a couple of reasons.
One is that I can't really know
if the project is a good
fit for me and vice versa
until I talk to the client.
So it wouldn't make sense
for me to go into a hard sell
where I try to get hired
right there in my proposal
when what I really need to do
is to explore if there's even a good fit.
And the other reason I
liked this approach is that
it's really a modern approach in that
I'm able to keep my proposals
very succinct, very streamlined,
which works nicely
with those conditions we discussed earlier
of clients being busier than ever,
having more choices than
ever before and so on.
All right, now let's talk about
the specific elements
of a winning proposal.
You can see I've broken it down
into just three basic elements.
One, a brief introduction.
This is going to be your icebreaker.
Something that draws the client in
so they read the rest of your proposal.
The second element,
proof that you can do a
great job for the client.
This is going to be the
real meat of your proposal.
The part that really makes
the client say, "Wow."
And three, a clear call to action,
which is a simple way to prompt clients
to respond to your proposal,
which again, is the main
goal of my proposals.
Now, let's dive deeper
and take an in-depth look at each element
along with specific examples
and guidelines for how
to put them into action.
We'll start naturally
with the first element,
a brief introduction.
First, let's break down
the goals of your brief introduction.
So of course,
we wanna get the client
attention, very important,
but we also wanna start building rapport.
We're really trying to make a connection.
And finally, and this
is an underrated one,
we wanna show the client
we read their job post
because a lot of freelancers,
believe it or not, don't do that.
They may copy and paste
the generic proposal
that really has little or nothing to do
with the client's actual job posts.
And the client is going to
wonder whether the freelancer
even read the job post before applying.
And in many cases, it
seems like they did not.
So showing the client you read their posts
is a small gesture that
can actually go a long way.
So those are the main goals
we're trying to squeeze
out of this brief introduction.
And I've got a couple of simple,
elegant ways to do that
that only take a few seconds to implement.
Okay, so the first is something I call
the personal connection introduction.
I'll show you examples in just a second,
but basically, the personal
connection introduction
is a spontaneous statement
that's unique to the client or situation.
Think of it as a kind
of conversation starter.
For example, it can be
a genuine compliment,
a statement of empathy,
talking about something you have in common
or really anything along those lines.
Here you can see some real examples.
The first one is from a proposal
where I was responding to a job post
from a client who was about
to do a product launch.
The second one was shown to me on LinkedIn
by an IT professional,
who was writing to a client
whose website had
unfortunately been hacked.
And the third one is my standard intro
whenever I'm responding to
a job invite from a client.
Notice how these are really
brief and straightforward
yet they do work quite well.
Now, sometimes there
just isn't an opportunity
to use the personal
connection introduction
because not every job
post is conducive to it.
When that's the case,
I have another go-to intro I like to use.
I call this the affirmation approach.
The affirmation approach is even simpler
because you basically just repeat back
whatever the client said they
needed in their job posts.
In addition to being simple and easy,
it takes just about 10 seconds to do.
It's also universally applicable.
Unlike the personal connection,
you can use it in any situation.
It's not quite as powerful as
the personal connection intro,
but it is a solid backup.
Okay, now here you can see some examples
of the affirmation approach in action.
"Hi, I see you're looking
for a developer proficient
in Ruby on Rails and AngularJS
to complete an existing project."
"Hi, I see you're looking for an editor
to tighten up your manuscript."
"Hi, I see you need help
setting up Zapier automations."
Again, as you can see,
this is a very straightforward approach,
yet it doesn't work well.
Okay, let's walk through
some quick guidelines
to help you when you're writing
your brief introduction.
As you can see from my examples,
I generally try to keep
my introductions short.
I keep it simple.
And it's also important
not to try too hard.
Sometimes I'll see freelancers
try to use these approaches
and they get too fancy with it.
For example, they may try to force
some sort of personal connection
when there really isn't
an opportunity for it.
And it can come off as
unnatural or worse disingenuous.
I also sometimes see
people try to get too fancy
with their affirmation approach.
For example, they may go too far
and put words in the client's mouth,
instead of just pretty much repeating back
what the client has asked for.
Another thing I'll sometimes see is
people trying to combine
these two approaches.
And that just doesn't work either.
So remember to keep it simple.
Okay, let's move on
to the second element
of a winning proposal,
proof you can do a great job.
The best, most effective way I know
of to do that is to show clients
one or more relevant examples of your work
right in your proposal.
Showing an example of relevant work
is so powerful for several reasons.
First of all, it instantly shows off
your skills in a tangible way
compared to simply telling the client
that you're qualified
to work on their job.
It also alleviates one of
the client's biggest concerns
because clients are always wondering,
can this freelancer do a good
job, not just on any project,
but on my project in particular?
And so when you show them
an example of your work
that's relevant to their needs
or similar to what they need,
it's almost like letting
them look into a crystal ball
and predict the future
because they can see
the results you achieved
on a similar piece of work.
And finally, showing a
relevant example of work
helps you stand out
because in my experience,
most freelancers don't do it.
So the client will really appreciate
seeing that relevant
work example from you,
especially if they've already read through
a bunch of proposals
that did not contain one.
Now, sometimes when I
talk about this subject,
people will put up a little protest.
They'll say,
"But Danny, I'm new to Upwork
or I'm new to freelancing altogether
and I don't have a big
portfolio to work with."
And to that I say, first of all,
the work you show
does not have to be work you've
done for clients on Upwork.
In fact, it doesn't even have
to be work you've done for clients at all.
It can be something you did for a friend,
relative, a nonprofit
or it can even be something
you just did for yourself,
even something you did for fun
or just something you did for the purpose
of building up your portfolio.
Yes, that is allowed.
For example, last year,
I noticed there were
lots of jobs being posted
for copywriters who could
write landing pages for apps.
So I looked through my
portfolio and guess what?
I'd never written a landing
page for an app before.
So can you guess what I did?
I wrote a landing page for an app.
I came up with the idea for an app
and I wrote some landing
page copy about it.
The app does not actually exist,
at least not outside of my own mind,
but the landing page
copy I wrote is very real
and I used it to get quite a few jobs.
So this is really something anyone can do
and you do not need a big
portfolio to pull it off.
Another thing some people will say to me
regarding showing a relevant
example of work is they'll say,
"Danny, I can see how this would work
for creative types like
writers or designers,
but I'm neither of those things.
So what should I do?"
And my answer to that is
I have helped freelancers
in just about every
category of work imaginable
and I have yet to discover a profession
where it is not possible to show clients
a tangible relevant example of your work.
You can see a few specific
examples on the screen here
and there are many more examples.
I could spend all day
making a list of them,
but this should at least
spark some ideas for you.
So for example,
a social media manager can
show screenshots of posts
that are relevant to what
a client is looking for.
A marketing professional could
create a marketing funnel
and show that to clients.
I once saw a lawyer here on Upwork
who cleverly showed clients examples
of contracts she'd worked on.
And of course, she removed
any personal info from those,
but clients were able to
physically see her work,
which was great.
An Excel specialist could do
something similar to that,
except of course with spreadsheets.
A proofreader can show
before and after examples
of their work and on and on.
The list of ideas is truly never ending.
So by this point,
hopefully I've convinced
you of the power of showing
relevant work examples in your proposals.
Now, let's talk about how I do it.
First of all, I do not just tell clients
to check out my portfolio.
Instead, I actually go ahead and pick out
one to three of my most
relevant examples for them.
That makes it easier for the client,
which they will appreciate.
And it also makes it more likely
they'll see the specific pieces
of work I want them to see.
I'll usually attach it
to my proposal as a PDF
or if it's something that
makes more sense to link to,
for example, a live blog post,
then I would go ahead
and drop a link to that.
Now, quick side note.
Just make sure you never
link clients to a page
that they can contact you from
since that is against
Upwork's terms of use.
And finally, perhaps the
most important guideline
I can give you is to not
just drop your work in a client's lap,
but to explain what
makes the work relevant,
special or unique to the client's needs.
I call this process tour guiding
clients through your work.
Okay, here you can see a proposal I wrote
that got me an excellent
client by the way.
And you can see how
not only did I include a
relevant example of work,
but I actually use a significant
portion of my proposal
to tour guide the client
through that piece of work.
Notice also that I did not just point out
random things about my work,
I kept it highly relevant
to what the client needed,
which was an email series to
help him sell an online course.
This has some tremendous benefits.
It increases the perceived
value of your work
because guess what?
This stuff may not be obvious to clients
when they see your work.
You are a professional at what you do,
but they probably don't have
the same knowledge and expertise you do.
And in any case,
clients will appreciate the fact
that you went out of your way
to highlight some key points for them.
And they'll also be very happy
to see how knowledgeable you are
about the work they need done.
So tour guiding really
helps you position yourself
as an authority on the work you're doing,
which is a very attractive
quality clients are looking for.
And finally, tour guiding
gives clients a better idea
of the type of work
they can expect from you
assuming they hire you.
So this really sets you
up for success in terms of
delivering on their
expectations once you're hired.
Now, once you get used to tour guiding,
it really becomes second nature.
But in the meantime,
when you're sitting there
writing your proposal,
here are some questions
you can ask yourself
that will help you tour guide
clients most effectively.
One, what makes this work
relevant to the client?
Two, what did you learn
from working on it?
Three, what makes it a
quality piece of work?
Four, is there anything that
makes it unique or stand out?
Five, did it achieve any specific result?
And know that this can even
be an intangible result
like the client loved it so much.
They immediately rehired
me for another project.
And finally, did someone else
say something good about it?
If so, you can use that as
a testimonial for your work.
Please keep in mind,
these questions are only intended
to spark your imagination.
You do not need to answer all of them,
even one or two can work quite well.
Now, with everything I've just told you,
if for whatever reason you
are really truly absolutely
unable to show a client a
relevant example of your work,
but you honestly believe you are qualified
to work on their project anyway,
I'm going to give you
an alternative strategy
for writing a proposal in that case.
However, please note
that this is not ideal
though it is something I
may do from time to time.
And so what you can do
in that case is to talk
about a relevant work experience instead.
Again, it doesn't work as well
and there is a bit of risk involved
because it lacks that glimpse
into the future aspect
we talked about earlier
because the client isn't seeing
a completed piece of work you've done.
So they really don't know
exactly what to expect
from you if they hire you.
So I consider this approach
to be somewhat advanced
and you should really only use it
if you're extremely confident
that you can do a great job
for the client if hired.
With that said, in the right situations,
it can work quite well and
here are some ways to do it.
You can tell a story about
your previous experience
or about a relevant piece
of work you've done.
You can talk about a
result you've achieved
or helped someone else
achieve through your work.
You can use a testimonial
to back up your previous experience.
And these last two bullets.
Now, notice that I've bolded these
because I think these are really key
if you're going to use this approach
and these are sharing your
knowledge or expertise
and offering one or more
helpful suggestions for
the client's project.
And by that I mean,
preferably specific suggestions
for their situation and goals.
And I really liked those last
two bullet points especially
because they do give some of that glimpse
into the future aspect to your proposal
because at least clients can
see your thought process,
how you might approach their job.
You also have a chance to
position yourself as an authority
because when you're sharing your knowledge
or offering helpful suggestions,
you're not just telling the
client about your experience,
you're also showing them
that you know what you're talking about.
And by the way,
even if you do show a client
a relevant example of your work,
you can also combine that
with any of the approaches on this screen
to make it even more powerful.
Okay, now here is an example of a proposal
where I use this approach.
In this case, the client wanted someone
to write a few chatbots
scripts for a car dealership.
Now, I had never written a chatbot script,
but I am a professional writer.
And I also have some relevant
experience in this area
because I did use to
work at a car dealership.
And one of my duties in that job
was actually doing live
chat with customers
on the dealership's website.
So you can say that I was
sort of a human chatbot.
And so I felt like I
would be a perfect fit.
But of course, since I had
never written a chatbot script,
I did not have any
relevant examples of work
to show the client.
So I decided to talk about my
relevant experience instead.
But notice, I didn't just
say that I had experience,
I still proved it.
And I did that by sharing
my specific knowledge
and expertise in this area
and by offering a specific suggestion.
So really, even though I
did not show the client
any kind of relevant work example,
when he reads this,
he's gonna realize that I
have a deep understanding
of what he is trying to accomplish
and how to make it happen.
This proposal did lead me
to getting hired for the job
and I was able to do a
great job for the client,
but it still would have
been a better proposal
if I had been able to include
a relevant example of my work.
Now, one thing that's very cool
about the techniques I've
just shown you is that
in addition to using them
in your cover letter
portion of your proposals,
you can also use them
when writing your answers
to screening questions as well.
And real quick here,
in case you aren't familiar
with screening questions,
these are questions that you're required
to answer on some proposals.
When a client posts a job,
it's up to them whether or not
to include screening questions.
And you can see an
example here on the screen
of what it looks like when a
job posts does include those.
So here is an example of a
type of screening question
that tends to be fairly common
along with what I consider
to be a very good answer.
And by the way,
this is from a proposal
written by one of my students
who gave me permission to share it.
And this was a successful proposal,
meaning it resulted in
my student getting hired.
So anyway, as you can see,
the client is asking basically,
do you have experience
with this type of work?
And then my student
handled it beautifully.
Not by just saying yes,
but also talking specifically
about her experience,
sharing her knowledge,
showing a relevant example of work
and highlighting a specific achievement.
Here's another example
again, from one of my students
who also ended up being
hired for this job.
And this one is a bit different.
You can see that in this case,
there's a personal
connection introduction,
which is a pretty neat way to
answer a screening question.
She then shares her knowledge
and shows her expertise
while also highlighting
relevant work experience.
Really excellent stuff.
Okay, moving along.
Let's dig into winning
proposal element number three,
a clear call to action.
A call to action is simply
a way to end your proposal
in a way that prompts clients to respond.
So instead of just hoping they'll respond,
it's better to actually
give them a little nudge
that will make it more likely
that they will respondent.
Now, there are two ways I usually do this.
One, I may ask a question
about the project,
which when done right
will prompt the client
to write back to me.
And the other approach I may use is that
I may invite the client to a brief call
to discuss the project further.
Now, this is one of the easier aspects
of writing a winning proposal,
but there are still a
few important details
to pay attention to in
order to get this right.
First, let's quickly go over
the benefits of using
a clear call to action.
We've already discussed one of these,
which is simply that
it makes it more likely
clients will respond to you proposals.
But there's more.
If you use a call to action
in the way I'm gonna show you,
you'll also be moving
the conversation forward,
which is exactly where you want it to go.
I hear from a lot of freelancers
who maybe write a good proposal
and may even get some responses,
but they often tell me that
the conversation never
seems to go anywhere.
That's because you need to
move the conversation forward.
You can't just wait and
hope the client will do it.
And a clear call to action is
very helpful in doing that.
And finally, the two
types of call to action
I just showed you either
asking a clarifying question
or inviting the client to a call
to discuss the project in more detail.
Notice how they both convey
your interest in the project.
And this is a very good
thing because clients like it
when you're interested in their project.
In fact, all else being equal,
the freelancer who shows
the most genuine interest
is the one who's most likely to get hired.
So here you can see a very simple example
of how I successfully put
this approach into action
by asking a simple, clarifying question
that the client then
responded to very quickly.
In this case,
I didn't wanna go straight
for the call because
while I was potentially
interested in this job,
I really needed to know
a little more about it
before committing to a call.
And again, it ended up
working out very well.
Some quick guidelines
that can help you with
your calls to action.
First of all, I usually use just
one call to action per proposal.
I either ask a question or
ask for the call. Not both.
Similarly, I also usually limit myself
to asking just one question.
Remember, as I mentioned earlier,
I'm just trying to start a conversation
and I don't wanna overwhelm the client
with tons of questions.
Though some people have told me
they do well with several questions.
So of course, you should always feel free
to go with whatever works best for you.
And don't be afraid to
try different things.
Now, when I do ask clients a question,
I wanna make sure it's
not something arbitrary.
Questions should aim to clarify
one or more aspects of the job.
And I like to make it something
that's fairly easy for
the client to respond to.
Recall my question from
the previous slide,
where I simply asked the client
what he was going to be selling.
Okay, so let's just do a quick recap
and take a bird's eye view of
the three elements in action.
Notice again, how I begin with
a simple brief introduction.
From there, I moved to sharing
a relevant piece of work I've done
to prove that I can do a great job.
I also tour guide the
client through the work
explaining why it's relevant
and talking about it's key points
that I know he'll be interested in
and that show my expertise.
And of course that highlight
the quality of the work.
Finally, I end with a clear call action,
in this case, a simple
clarifying question.
Best of all,
this proposal took me just
a few minutes to write
and it resulted in a win for
both myself and the client.
Now, one thing you may have noticed is
what my proposals
generally do not contain.
Specifically, I usually do
not discuss details like
timeline or scheduling.
I generally do not offer to do the work.
For example, some freelancers will say,
"I can start on this right away."
I don't that because I don't really know
if there's a good fit yet at this point.
I mean, I may suspect there's a good fit,
but I don't really know until
after I talked to the client.
So I'm not going to go into
nitty-gritty details about scheduling
and other kinds of fine
print items in my proposal.
And this has a secondary benefit
of keeping my proposal succinct.
They've got stuff in
there that clients love
without bogging them down with details
in this preliminary phase.
Once I get clients on a call,
if I feel there's a good fit,
then we discuss the fine print